Fiddler, forbear.
You grow too forward, sir.
Have you so soon forgot the entertainment
her sister Katharine welcomed you withal?
Ooh, but, wrangling pedant,
this is the patroness of heavenly harmony.
Then give me leave to have prerogative,
and when in music, we have spent an hour,
your lecture shall have leisure for as much.
Preposterous ass that never read so far
to know the cause why music was ordain'd.
Was it not to refresh the mind of man
after his studies or his usual pain?
Then give me leave to read philosophy,
and while I pause, serve in your harmony.
Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine.
Oh, you--
Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong
to strive for that which resteth in my choice.
I am no breeching scholar in the schools.
I'll not be tied to hours nor 'pointed times
but learn my lessons as I please myself.
And to cut off all strife, here sit we down.
Ah.
Take you your instrument, and play you the whiles.
His lecture will be done ere you have tuned.
You'll leave his lecture when I am in tune?
That will be never.
Tune your instrument.
Where left we last?
Here, madam:
"Hic ibat Simois; hic est Sigeia tellus;
Hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis."
Construe them.
"Hic ibat"--
As I told you before--
"Simois"--
I am Lucentio--
"Hic est"--
son unto Vincentio of Pisa--
"sigeia tellus"--
disguised thus to get your love--
"Hic steterat"--
and that Lucentio that comes a-wooing--
"Priami"--
is my man Tranio--
"regia"--
bearing my port--
"celsa senis."
that we might beguile the old pantaloon.
Madam, my instrument's in tune.
O, let's hear.
O fie, the treble jars.
Spit in the hole, man, and tune again.
Tsk.
Now let me see if I can construe it.
"Hic ibat Simois"--
I know you not.
"Hic est Sigeia tellus"--
I trust you not.
"Hic steterat Priami"--
Take heed he hear us not.
"regia"--
Hmm.
Presume not.
"celsa senis."
Despair not.
Madam, 'tis now in tune.
All but the base.
The base is right.
'Tis the base knave that jars.
How fiery and forward our pedant is.
Now, for my life, the knave doth court my love.
Pedascule, I'll watch you better yet.
In time I may believe, yet I mistrust.
Mistrust it not,
for, sure, Aeacides was Ajax,
call'd so from his grandfather.
I must believe my master, else, I promise you,
I should be arguing still upon that doubt.
But let it rest.
Now, Licio, to you.
Good master, take it not unkindly, pray,
that I have been thus pleasant with you both.
You may go walk and give me leave a while, hmm?
My lessons make no music in three parts.
Are you so formal, sir?
Well, I must wait and watch withal,
for but I be deceived,
our fine musician groweth amorous.
Madam, before you touch the instrument,
to learn the order of my fingering,
I must begin with rudiments of art,
to teach you gamut in a briefer sort,
more pleasant, pithy, and effectual,
than hath been taught by any of my trade;
and there it is in writing, fairly drawn.
Why, I am past my gamut long ago.
But read the gamut of Hortensio.
Read it.
"'Gamut'-- I am the ground of all accord--
"'A re'-- to plead Hortensio's passion.
"'B mi'-- Bianca, take him for thy lord--
"'C fa ut'-- that loves with all affection.
"'D sol re'-- One clef, two notes have I.
'E la mi'-- Show pity, or I die."
Call you this gamut?
I like it not:
Old fashions please me best.
I am not so nice as to change true rules
for old inventions.
Mistress,
your father prays you, leave your books
and help to dress your sister's chamber up.
You know tomorrow is the wedding-day.
Farewell, sweet masters both.
I must be gone.
Oh.
Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.
But I have cause to pry into this pedant.
Methinks he looks as though he were in love.
Yet if thy thoughts, Bianca, be so humble
to cast thy wandering eyes on any stale,
seize thee that list.
If once I find thee ranging,
Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.
Signior Lucentio, this is the 'pointed day
that Katharina and Petruchio should be married,
and yet we hear not of our son-in-law.
What will be said?
What mockery will it be
to want the bridegroom when the priest attends
to speak the ceremonial rites of marriage?
What says Lucentio to this shame of ours?
No shame but mine.
I must, forsooth, be forced
to give my hand opposed against my heart
unto a mad-brained rudesby full of spleen
who woos in haste and means to wed at leisure.
I told you, I, he was a frantic fool,
hiding his bitter jests in blunt behavior,
and to be noted for a merry man,
he'll woo a thousand, 'point the day of marriage,
make feasts, invite friends, and proclaim the banns,
yet never means to wed where he hath woo'd.
Now must the world point at poor Katharine
and say, "Lo, there is mad Petruchio's wife,
if it would please him come and marry her."
Patience, good Katharine, and Baptista too.
Upon my life, Petruchio means but well
whatever fortune stays him from his word.
Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise.
Though he be merry, yet withal, he's honest.
Would Katharine had never seen him though.
Go, girl.
I cannot blame thee now to weep,
for such an injury would vex a very saint,
much more a shrew of thy impatient humor.
Master, master, news,
and such old news as you never heard of.
Is it new and old too?
How may that be?
Why, is it not news to hear of Petruchio's coming?
Is he come?
Why, no, sir.
What then?
He's coming.
When will he be here?
When he stands where I am and sees you there.
But say, what to thine old news?
Why, Petruchio is coming in a new hat
and an old jerkin, a pair of old breeches thrice turned,
a pair of boots that have been candle-cases,
one buckled, another laced,
an old rusty sword ta'en out of the town armory with a broken hilt
and chapeless with two broken points,
his horse hipped with an old mothy saddle
and stirrups of no kindred; besides, possessed with the glanders
and like to mose in the chine, troubled with the lampas,
infected with the fashions, full of windgalls,
sped with spavins, rayed with yellows,
past cure of the fives, stark spoiled with the staggers,
begnawn with the bots, swayed in the back and shoulder-shotten,
near-legged before and with a half-checked bit
and a headstall of sheep's leather
which, being restrained to keep him from stumbling,
hath been often burst and now repaired with knots;
one girth six-times pieced and a woman's crupper of velure
which hath two letters for her name fairly set down in studs
and here and there pieced with packthread.
Who comes with him?
O, sir, his lackey, for all the world caparisoned like the horse,
with a linen stock on one leg
and a kersey boot-hose on the other,
gartered with a red and blue list, yeah;
an old hat and "the humor of 40 fancies"
pricked in't for a feather:
a monster, a very monster in apparel,
and not like a Christian footboy
or a gentleman's lackey.
'Tis some odd humor pricks him to this fashion,
yet oftentimes, he goes but mean-apparell'd.
I am glad he's comes, howsoe'er he comes.
Why, sir, he comes not.
Oh!
Oh, didst thou not say he comes?
Who? That Petruchio came?
Ay, that Petruchio came!
No, sir, I say his horse comes, with him on his back.
Why, that's all one.
Nay, by Saint Jamy,
I hold you a penny,
a horse and a man is more than one
and yet not many.
Where be these gallants?
Who's at home?
Ha, ha!
You are welcome, sir.
And yet I come not well.
And yet you halt not.
Not so well apparell'd as I wish you were.
Were it not better, I should rush in thus.
But where is Kate?
Where is my lovely bride?
How does my father?
Ah, ha, ha, ha, ha.
Gentles, methinks you frown,
and wherefore gaze this goodly company
as if they saw some wondrous monument,
some comet, or unusual prodigy?
Why, sir, you know this is your wedding day.
First, we were sad, fearing you would not come,
now sadder that you come so unprovided.
Fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate,
an eyesore to our solemn festival.
And tell us what occasion of import
hath all so long detain'd you from your wife
and sent you hither so unlike yourself?
Tedious it were to tell and harsh to hear.
Sufficeth, I am come to keep my word,
though in some part enforced to digress,
which, at more leisure, I shall so explain
as you shall well be satisfied withal.
But where is Kate?
I stay too long from her.
The morning wears.
'Tis time we were at church.
See not your bride in these unreverent robes.
Go--go--go to my chamber.
Put on clothes of mine.
Not I, believe me.
Thus, I'll visit her.
But thus, I trust, you will not marry her.
Good sooth, even so.
Therefore, ha' done with words.
To me she's married, not unto my clothes.
Could I repair what she will wear in me
as I can change these poor accoutrements,
'twere well for me and better for my Kate.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
But what a fool am I to chat with you
when I should bid good morrow to my bride
and seal the title with a lovely kiss.
Ah!
He hath some meaning in his mad attire.
We will persuade him, be it possible,
put on better ere he go to church.
I'll after him and see the event of this.
But to her love concerneth us to add her father's liking
which, to bring to pass, as I before unparted to your worship,
I am to get a man.
Eh?
Whate'er he be, it skills not much.
We'll fit him to our turn,
and he shall be Vincentio of Pisa
and make assurance here in Padua
of greater sums than I have promised.
So shall you quietly enjoy your hope
and marry sweet Bianca with consent.
Were it not that my fellow schoolmaster
doth watch Bianca's steps so narrowly,
'twere good, methinks, to steal our marriage,
which once perform'd-- let all the world say no--
I'll keep mine own despite of all the world.
That by degrees we mean to look into
and watch our vantage in this business.
We'll overreach the graybeard, Gremio,
the narrow-prying father, Minola,
the quaint musician, amorous Licio
all for my master's sake, Lucentio.
Oh, Signior Gremio, came you from the church?
Oh, as willingly as e'er I came from school.
And is the bride and bridegroom coming home?
Bridegroom say you?
'Tis a groom indeed, a grumbling groom,
and that the girl shall find.
Curseder than she?
Why, it is impossible.
Why, he's a devil, a devil, a very fiend.
Why, she's a devil, a devil, the devil's dam.
Tut, she's a lamb, a dove, a fool to him.
I'll tell you, Sir Lucentio,
when the priest should ask if Katharine should be his wife,
"Ay, by gogs-wouns," quoth he and swore so loud
that, all-amazed, the priest let fall the book,
and as he stoop'd again to take it up,
this mad-brain'd bridegroom took him such a cuff
that down fell priest and book and book and priest.
"Now take them up," quoth he, "if any list."
What said the wench when he rose again?
Trembled and shook, for, why, he stamp'd and swore
as if the vicar meant to cozen him.
But after many ceremonies done, he calls for wine.
"Her health," quoth he as if he had been aboard,
carousing to his mates after a storm,
quaff'd off the muscadel
and threw the sops all in the sexton's face,
having no other reason
but that his beard grew thin and hungerly
and seem'd to ask him sops as he was drinking.
This done, he took the bride about the neck
and kiss'd her lips with such a clamorous smack
that at the parting all the church did echo,
and, I, seeing this came thence for very shame,
and after me, I know, the rout is coming.
Such a mad marriage never was before.
Hark, hark, I hear the minstrels play.
Gentlemen and friends, I thank you for your pains.
I know you think to dine with me today
and have prepared great store of wedding cheer,
but so it is my haste doth call me hence,
and therefore, here I mean to take my leave.
Is't possible you will away tonight?
I must away today, before night comes.
Make it no wonder.
If you knew my business,
you would entreat me rather go than stay.
And, honest company, I thank you all
that have beheld me give away myself
to this most patient, sweet, and virtuous wife.
Dine with my father.
Drink a health to me, for I must hence, and farewell to you all.
Let us entreat you stay till after dinner.
It may not be.
- Let me entreat you. - It cannot be.
- Let me entreat you. - I am content.
You are content to stay?
I am content you shall entreat me stay, but yet not stay.
Entreat me how you can.
Now, if you love me, stay.
Grumio, my horse.
Ay, sir, they be ready.
The oats have eaten the horses.
Nay, then, do what thou canst.
I will not go today,
no, nor tomorrow, not till I please myself.
The door is open, sir.
There lies your way.
You may be jogging whiles your boots are green.
For me, I'll not be gone till I please myself!
'Tis like you'll prove a jolly surly groom
that take it on you at the first so roundly.
O Kate, content thee.
Prithee, be not angry.
I will be angry!
What hast thou to do?
Father, be quiet!
He shall stay my leisure.
Ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work.
Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner.
I see a woman may be made a fool
if she had not a spirit to resist.
They shall go forward, Kate, at thy command.
Obey the bride, you that attend on her.
Go to the feast, revel, and domineer,
carouse full measure to her maidenhead,
be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves,
but for my bonny Kate, she must with me.
Nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret.
I will be master of what is mine own.
She is my goods, my chattels.
She is my house, my household stuff,
my field, my barn,
my horse, my ox, my ass, my--oh--anything;
and here she stands.
Touch her whoever dare.
I'll bring mine action on the proudest he
that stops my way in Padua.
Grumio, draw forth thy weapon.
We are beset with thieves!
Rescue thy mistress if thou be a man.
Fear not, sweet wench, they shall not touch thee, Kate.
I'll buckler thee against a million.
Nay, let them go.
A couple of quiet ones.
Went--went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.
Of all mad matches, never was the like.
Mistress, what's your opinion of your sister?
Oh, that being mad herself, she's madly mated.
I warrant him, Petruchio is Kated.
Ho, neighbours and friends,
though bride and bridegroom wants
for to supply the places at the table,
you know there want no junkets at the feast.
Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom's place,
and let Bianca take her sister's room.
Shall sweet Bianca practise how to bride it?
She shall, Lucentio.
Gentlemen, let's go.